Proposal for bioindustrial iodine production. Abstract/grant proposal

Iodine is an important and irreplacable element in industry [cite needed], healthcare [cite needed: world health essential medicines], chemistry, and other applications such as forensics [cite needed]. In the past, iodine was harvested from kelp due to the seaweed's high iodine content [cite needed] but increasing demand has motivated a shift towards mineral extraction; the world's three predominant sources of iodine today are caliche mines in Chile [cite needed], and briny water extraction in Oklahoma [cite needed] and Japan [cite needed]. For ecological sustainability, industry sustainability, and the economic security of an essential resource, we see a motivation to explore alternative, novel biotechnological methods for scalable iodine production.

This proposal is derived from hints that come from several sources: one, that the thyroid has a very high specificity for iodine, so much so that radioactive iodine is a viable treatment for thyroid cancer [cite needed], and this has led to the identification of some of the mechanisms for highly selective iodine uptake [cite needed]. Two, kelp has already been identified as an iodine source [cite needed] (but for reasons that are unknown), and kelp is already an organism of study for various other research and industrial prospectives [cite needed], such that there is prior research to build from. Three, practically all organisms use require iodine for survival or use it for signalling, so across the kingdoms, there are biotechnologies waiting to be discovered. These hints have opened a possibility that we might re-engineer an organism -- whether kelp, protist, microorganism, simple vertebrate endocrine systems, or even an animal source -- to extract iodine with high specificity from the environment and open a new avenue for industrial iodine production.

This proposal hopes to find support for the following research program. 
1. **Discovery**: Survey, organize, and study the natural and pre-existing methods for iodine selectivity across kingdoms, species, and chemistry. If need be, perform basic studies on viable organisms with high iodine content or utility to identify the ways the organism regulates, uptakes, and moves iodine.
2. **Dry lab**: Use biocomputational exploratory analysis to (a) generate candidate synthetic biomolecules that can cause an accrual of iodine[1] and (b) (reword this) devise methods for genomic insertion, species survival, and auxiliary genomic changes that render the iodine selectivity scheme viable (eg, prevent species from invading surrounding habitat, minimize predation by reducing nutritional value, innoculate against diseases, innoculate against iodine poisining, etc.)
3. **Wet lab**: Use recombinant technology to engineer organisms that accrue iodine, and select the most effective organisms.
4. **Extraction site selection**: Survey natural and environmental sources of underutilized iodine and ways the top-performing organisms can plausibly render this iodine more available to extraction at a cost-effective rate. The most promising candidates are ambient ocean waters, soil, rivers, waste sites [cite needed].
5. **Aquafarming**: Design a prototype engineering pipeline to test the organism's actual ability to accrue iodine, the method's sustainability, and cost to harvest the element. Analyze the technology economically and ecologically. Keywords: (Algaculture)[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algaculture#Uses_of_algae], mariculture.
6. **Marketing**: Build a biotechnology company to scale up the technology and sell the resulting iodine for profit, for resource independence, or as a direct food additive.

One path that realizes this research program is to take iodine-selective membrane proteins such as animal Na-I symporter and include it into the genome of a biofilm-forming single cell organism such as a protist related to kelp, and possibly knock out its other sodium intake pumps to put pressure on the organism to express the symporter. Then, identify a moving oceanic or river delta water that is at low environmental threat that the organism grows in sufficiently well. Next, build wide trays for the organism to grow on, with low-impact ways to protect the organism from predators such as fine meshes, and submerge them in the environmental water. Finally, use chemical extraction to harvest samples of the organism to retrieve iodine. Draft a business proposal plan based on the likely ways this method could be scaled up, or identify the research or technological improvements that bottleneck the business's economic viablity.

This 'industrial development bioresearch' process can apply not only to iodine but also to a variety of vitamins, minerals, or industrial precursors that are currently harvested from the environment in unsustainable ways; besides other minerals important for human health, fertilizer constituents seem like a prime candidate. This workflow and the resulting industrial biotechnology could pave the way for:
- new, less-extractive methods for mineral acquisition,
- the design of a natural multivitamin that can be mailed across the world in a petri dish,
- sunlight-driven energy-neutral mineral extraction,
- possible applications to waste processing,
- a means to stimulate research into novel biomolecular mechanisms,  
- the opportunity for economically-strifed communities to stimulate business in their backyards, and
- a business model that is flexible enough to adapt to market demands, successful arms of the business, and technological breakthroughs.

Notes
[1] One way to identify iodine transporters is to replace iodine in a cup of seawater with radio-labeled iodine, and let the organisms incorporate it however they wish. After some time, sample the organisms in the water, and see which show higher concentrations of iodine. Sequence their genomes and try to identify novel transporters. 
[2] There are plenty of ways to encourage iodine density into the organism. One way is to bond iodine to calorie-dense foods like starches and provide it in the broth to a carnivorous organism for testing, and then for performance-time, provide catalysts (biological or not) that cause this reaction of iodine with large fuel molecules (largeness lowers impact of iodine uptake). There are numerous workflows to get the iodine into the cells. Hell, even surface antibody-like MHC2 receptors that are specific to iodine could work.
[?] It is unclear as to the local environmental impact of this method at the scale we are looking at. Locally, iodine stays at constant concentrations in seawater, and from the little we know about iodine in marine biology, it's clear that it has a number of biological, biochemical, and ecological roles. If we extract a substantial fraction of ambient iodine, it might disrupt certain organisms. Also, it is an engineering challenge to bring these organisms to their worksite: they might escape, or get eaten, or require performance additives that might themselves impact the environment. 
