

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iodine?action=raw


==Occurrence and production==
Iodine is the least abundant of the stable halogens, comprising only 0.46&nbsp;[[Parts-per notation|parts per million]] of Earth's crustal rocks (compare: [[fluorine]]: 544&nbsp;ppm, [[chlorine]]: 126&nbsp;ppm, [[bromine]]: 2.5&nbsp;ppm) making it the 60th most abundant element.<ref name="Greenwood795">Greenwood and Earnshaw, pp. 795–796.</ref> Iodide minerals are rare, and most deposits that are concentrated enough for economical extraction are iodate minerals instead. Examples include [[Calcium iodate|lautarite]], Ca(IO<sub>3</sub>)<sub>2</sub>, and dietzeite, 7Ca(IO<sub>3</sub>)<sub>2</sub>·8CaCrO<sub>4</sub>.<ref name="Greenwood795" /> These are the minerals that occur as trace impurities in the [[caliche]], found in [[Chile]], whose main product is [[sodium nitrate]]. In total, they can contain at least 0.02% and at most 1% iodine by mass.<ref name="Elzea">{{cite book |title = Industrial Minerals & Rocks: Commodities, Markets, and Uses |publisher = SME |date = 2006 |isbn = 978-0-87335-233-8 |url = https://books.google.com/books?id=zNicdkuulE4C |pages = 541–552 | veditors = Kogel JE, Trivedi NC, Barker JM, Krukowski ST }}</ref> [[Sodium iodate]] is extracted from the caliche and reduced to iodide by [[sodium bisulfite]]. This solution is then reacted with freshly extracted iodate, resulting in [[comproportionation]] to iodine, which may be filtered off.<ref name="Greenwood800" />

The caliche was the main source of iodine in the 19th century and continues to be important today, replacing [[kelp]] (which is no longer an economically viable source),<ref>{{cite journal |url = https://books.google.com/books?id=wW8KAAAAIAAJ&pg=PA185 | vauthors = Stanford EC |journal = Journal of the Society of Arts |title = On the Economic Applications of Seaweed |date = 1862 |pages = 185–189}}</ref> but in the late 20th century [[brine]]s emerged as a comparable source. The Japanese [[Minami Kantō gas field]] east of [[Tokyo]] and the American [[Anadarko Basin]] gas field in northwest [[Oklahoma]] are the two largest such sources. The brine is hotter than 60&nbsp;°C from the depth of the source. The brine is first [[List of purification methods in chemistry|purified]] and acidified using [[sulfuric acid]], then the iodide present is oxidised to iodine with chlorine. An iodine solution is produced, but is dilute and must be concentrated. Air is blown into the solution to [[Evaporation|evaporate]] the iodine, which is passed into an absorbing tower, where [[sulfur dioxide]] reduces the iodine. The [[hydrogen iodide]] (HI) is reacted with chlorine to precipitate the iodine. After filtering and purification the iodine is packed.<ref name="Elzea" /><ref>{{cite journal |journal = Geochemical Journal |volume = 40 |page = 475 |date = 2006 |title = Chemical and isotopic compositions of brines from dissolved-in-water type natural gas fields in Chiba, Japan | vauthors = Maekawa T, Igari SI, Kaneko N |doi = 10.2343/geochemj.40.475 |issue = 5 |bibcode = 2006GeocJ..40..475M|doi-access = free }}</ref>

{{block indent| 2 HI + Cl<sub>2</sub> → I<sub>2</sub>↑ + 2 HCl}}
{{block indent| I<sub>2</sub> + 2 H<sub>2</sub>O + SO<sub>2</sub> → 2 HI + H<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub>}}
{{block indent| 2 HI + Cl<sub>2</sub> → I<sub>2</sub>↓ + 2 HCl}}

These sources ensure that Chile and Japan are the largest producers of iodine today.<ref name="Greenwood795" /> The companies [[Sociedad Química y Minera]] (SQM) and [[Cosayach]] lead iodine mining in Chile.<ref>{{Cite news |title=Algorta Norte busca estar entre los tres principales produtores de yodo |date=2012-03-19 |url=https://www.df.cl/empresas/algorta-norte-busca-estar-entre-los-tres-mayores-productores-de-yodo |access-date=2025-08-07 |work=[[Diario Financiero]] |language=es}}</ref> Alternatively, the brine may be treated with [[silver nitrate]] to precipitate out iodine as [[silver iodide]], which is then decomposed by reaction with iron to form metallic silver and a solution of [[iron(II) iodide]]. The iodine is then liberated by displacement with [[chlorine]].<ref name="Greenwood799">Greenwood and Earnshaw, p. 799.</ref>

Large purple clouds of sublimated iodine have been observed at iodine extraction sites.<ref>{{Cite news |title=Autoridades monitorean evento que dejó una nube púrpura de vapor de yodo en Pozo Almonte |date=2022-08-21 |url=https://cooperativa.cl/noticias/pais/region-de-tarapaca/autoridades-monitorean-evento-que-dejo-una-nube-purpura-de-vapor-de-yodo/2022-08-21/204433.html |access-date=2025-08-04 |work=[[Radio Bío-Bío]] |language=es}}</ref>

==Applications==
About half of all produced iodine goes into various [[Organoiodine chemistry|organoiodine compounds]], another 15% remains as the pure element, another 15% is used to form [[potassium iodide]], and another 15% for other [[Iodine compounds|inorganic iodine compounds]].<ref name="Greenwood800" /> Among the major uses of iodine compounds are [[Catalysis|catalysts]], animal feed supplements, stabilisers, dyes, colourants and pigments, pharmaceutical, sanitation (from [[tincture of iodine]]), and photography; minor uses include [[Smog tower|smog inhibition]], [[cloud seeding]], and various uses in [[analytical chemistry]].<ref name="Greenwood800" />

===X-ray imaging===
As an element with high [[electron density]] and atomic number, iodine efficiently absorbs X-rays.  X-ray [[Radiocontrast agent|radiocontrast]] agents is the top application for iodine.<ref name="Ullmann"/>  In this application, Organoiodine compounds are injected intravenously. This application is often in conjunction with advanced X-ray techniques such as [[angiography]] and [[CT scan]]ning. At present, all water-soluble radiocontrast agents rely on [[Iodinated contrast|iodine-containing compounds]].

Iodine absorbs X-rays with energies less than 33.3&nbsp;keV due to the [[photoelectric effect]] of the innermost electrons.<ref>{{cite book | vauthors = Lancaster JL | chapter-url = http://ric.uthscsa.edu/personalpages/lancaster/DI-II_Chapters/DI_chap4.pdf | chapter = Chapter 4: Physical Determinants of Contrast | archive-url =https://web.archive.org/web/20151010172937/http://ric.uthscsa.edu/personalpages/lancaster/DI-II_Chapters/DI_chap4.pdf | archive-date=10 October 2015 | title = Physics of Medical X-Ray Imaging | publisher = The University of Texas Health Science Center }}</ref> 




also see, to great benefit: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iodine_in_biology
has excellent map of iodine sources in nature.